The Daily Vox team has rounded up some of the best academic opportunities for 2020. Established in 2011, the Global Change Leaders Program is a seven-week education program offered by Coady Institute’s International Centre for Women’s Leadership. The programme has been created for women from developing countries to allow them to strengthen their leadership capacities. There are two components for the programme. The first course runs from June to July 2020 and the second from September 2020 until February 2021. Deadline: 22 November 2019 [Details can be found here] SDGS & Her is an online competition for women-led micro and small businesses to display how they are supporting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Winners will receive mentorship and be flown to Washington DC to showcase their achievements. Deadline: 10 January 2020 [Details can be found here] The Global Fund for Women are calling on women from the Carribean, Middle East, and the African continent to apply to form the Adolescent Girls Advisory Council. The council will be responsible for finding and amplifying girl-led groups in their activism. Deadline: 25 November 2019 [Details can be found here] The SheBegan scholarship is a grant that will fully fund study in any level of university education in the United States. First preference will be given to women who are able to show they’ve done work with empowering other women through professional or community work. Candidates will need to receive acceptance from a university to qualify for the grant. Deadline: 20 April 2020 [Details can be found here] Young and committed feminists are invited to join the 2020 Global Advisory Committee. FRIDA is a youth-led fund focused on supporting youth feminist activism around the world. There are two categories open for the committee: The first category is for girl advisors between the ages of 13-19 with the second category looking for feminists under the age of 35 to join the advisory committee. Deadline: 5 December 2019 [Details available here] Applications are open for the African Women’s Public Service Fellowship 2020 for Masters study at NYU Wagner. The fellowship was made possible by a donation from the Oprah Winfrey Foundation. It provides an opportunity for African women to impact public service in their home countries. This fellowship is only available to degree-seeking students. Deadline: 2 December 2019 [Details available here] Every year Technovation invites girls from all around the world to learn and apply the skills needed to solve real world problems through technology. The programme is free and all that is needed is a laptop with internet. To be eligible to compete, participants must identify as women and be between the ages of 10-18. Deadline: 16 March 2020 [Details available here] The Impact the World Film Festival is an annual festival focusing on issues women around the world are facing. High school and undergraduate students are encouraged to submit short films that address global women’s issues. There are cash prizes available for the winners. Deadline: 20 January 2020 [Details available here] Get applying and good luck!