It’s that time of the year. The new year is almost upon us and it’s time for new opportunities. Companies, universities and more have opened up their scholarships and learnerships. The Daily Vox rounds up. The Chevenings scholarships gives South African students the opportunity to study in the United Kingdom (UK). The scholarship offers successful students a fully-funded year of study. It covers university tuition fees, a monthly stipend, travel costs to and from the UK, an arrival allowance, a homeward departure allowance, the cost of one visa application, and a travel grant to attend Chevening events in the UK. Applications opened August 5. Check out the website for the full timeline of when applications close. There are a number of great learnerships available for students in South Africa. These are especially handy for people with matric certificates. They usually have a small timeframe to apply for them. Subscribe to The Bursary Bin to get the opportunities the moment they go live. The P&G Learnership Program is a corporate program in offer paid administrative experiences. Learners have the opportunity to build value to the company from day one with impactful work objectives. To apply, applicants need to have a Matric Certificate/Diploma with zero to three years working experience. Strong disciplinary skills and a willingness to continuously learn from the external environment is also a requirement. The closing date for the programme is not defined but more information can be found on the P&G site. BSappi is inviting matriculants or current undergraduate students who are interested in the Sappi bursary scheme to apply for various study fields concerned with engineering. Sappi offers bursaries covering tuition, registration, books, residence and living allowances. The bursary is open for South African citizens studying or intending to study full time at South African accredited universities. Applications close in September 2019. If you are a woman journalist, this is for you. The IWMF’s Howard G. Buffett Fund for Women Journalists supports the production of ambitious projects and underreported, globally important stories. Applicants must identify as a woman and be a full time professional practicing journalist with more than 3 years of post-graduate journalism experience. The fund provides grantees with support to expose under-reported but critical global issues and pursue critical skills training and leadership opportunities. Applications for this close September 5 2019. The Canon Collins Trust is an opportunity which seeks to support individuals who are committed to social justice in Southern Africa. In 2015 the trust revised its South African scholarship awards policy. Scholarships are now available for students studying in the field of justice, which includes law, economics, politics and the environment, education: policy and practice humanities, which includes literature, history, anthropology and the arts. To apply for the programme, you have to be a national of, or have refugee status in one of the following countries: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The David and Elaine Potter Foundation is inviting participants to join their programme to complete higher studies at the University of Cape Town. This opportunity is available for South African applicants in order to complete master’s and doctorate studies to contribute to civil society. Applications for the programme close September 30 2019. The programme calls for applicants who are “excited by the prospect of helping to lead South Africa into an ever more successful future.” Potential applicants must intend to contribute to civil society in South Africa, “by leveraging their educational advantage in any discipline.” The South African Reserve Bank is offering opportunities for Grade 12 learners to apply for their bursary programme. To be eligible for this bursary, the applicant must obtain 70 percent in the June Matric/Grade 12 examinations with final awarding subject to final results enrollment acceptance at a South African university. Aspirants, who would not have the means of attending university, had it not been for a bursary, would be considered. This list will be updated when more opportunities and learnerships arise. GOOD LUCK! Featured image via Blue Diamond Gallery