South Africa’s Survival Guide to Climate Change by Sarah Wild and Sipho Kings is a new book aiming to make the scary impending doom of the planet less scary. Okay, not really. The book does tackle the scary present and future that changing climate patterns is bringing to the planet. This is a reality no one can ignore. (unless you’re an American politician) This book “rests on the idea that we could possibly survive a changing climate.” The book has been sold as a “practical guide” to explore what the changing patterns means for South Africans. This is something that the book does well. Climate change is scary. It’s this huge thing that is happening and it feels like as individuals there is nothing we can do. Years of carbon emission increases through the use of fossil fuels has meant increases in global climate patterns. These global climate pattern changes is what is known as climate change. These climate patterns changes are catastrophic. An increase in one or two degrees to a regional climate is alarming but understandable. However, the increases in the global climate is a major cause for concern. This increases in global temperatures has meant everything in changing. The ice caps in the Arctic and Antarctic are melting ever faster as global temperatures increase. The oceans are becoming warmer which means more tropical cyclones and natural disasters are hitting coastal cities and countries. Not only is there an increase of natural disasters, their impacts are greater and more disastrous. All of these things are happening daily in front of us. But what can we do about it is the question. The book is divided into three parts. There is “survey the terrain”, “real and present dangers”, and “maak ‘n plan”. Each part of the book deals with a different climate change concern. In the first part, the authors lay out the problem. They look at what are the current effects from climate change, and what South Africa will look like if no action is taken. There is an in-depth look at what government and other organisations are doing to address the issue. A particularly interesting chapter is about why it matters the policies around climate should be localised. Many of the conversations around climate change have been about what governments and international organisations need to be doing with regards to policy change. Yet it is far more important that policy makers understand the local conditions when craftings ways to tackle climate change. The two other parts look at exactly how climate change is affecting South Africa and what are we doing to worsen the conditions of it. This includes food wastage, transport pollution and alien invasive plants. All of these actions contribute to worsening the effects of climate change. The final part is what is required from South Africans to tackle this issue. This includes changes at home, being ethical consumers, and how to bring the issue into the political space. The survival guide claims to have the answers. It is set out in a way that lays out the problem facing South Africa and then goes through the solution. Picking up the book for the first time, I was a little apprehensive. Climate change in the media and academically is often spoken up in high terms which is not accessible to the ordinary person. However, my fears were soon allayed. The book is easy to read and accessible. There are cool popup boxes that explain difficult concepts. Informative graphics are used to make certain points. The advice given is not patronising and is simple to follow. At the beginning of the book, the authors lay out a disclaimer. Even while they agree that climate change is the biggest threat of modern times, they don’t agree on some things. At the end of the book, they explain where they differ. It’s whether people should panic or not about climate change. Panic can be a good thing. It can galvanise people into taking action. Yet, it can also cause rash decisions to be made – worsening the situation. There is no one solution to climate change. But if you’re feeling helpless and scared, this book may have some answers. It doesn’t have all the answers. That would be impossible for any one book. But the biggest takeaway from the book is the need to do something. There is nothing more important than the first step. That message alone makes this book an essential “guide” for all South Africans.