After an unsuccessful World Cup Banyana Banyana had a lot to prove going into the COSAFA Women’s World Cup. And prove themselves they did. The national women’s soccer team played in their opening game against Comoros Island, producing a stunning victory. The Daily Vox team rounds up five of the team’s greatest victories. This list would be incomplete without mentioning their most recent victory. As the reigning COSAFA Women’s Cup champions, Banyana were under pressure to perform. In their opening game against Comoros, they did just that. They beat Comoros 17-0 with captain Refiloe Jane scoring four of the seventeen. This marks the team’s biggest ever victory. They have also broken the long-standing record of the Zimbabwean team. In 2002, Zimbabwe beat Lesotho 15-0. During the team’s first team with Comoros in 2014, Banyana beat them 14 goals 2014 This happened at the African Women’s championship qualifiers. Once more it was Modise who came through for the team, scoring four goals during the game. Leandra Smeda was also masterful on the pitch during that game, scoring four as well. Comoros actually withdraw from the qualifiers after that game which led to Banyana qualifying for the championship. In 2014, the national team played Botswana in an international friendly at the Royal Bafokeng Stadium. During that meeting they trounced neighbours Botswana 10-0. Jane who featured in that game was also on the scoreboard. Portia Modise, one of South Africa’s greatest footballers scored five goals during that game. The friendly game formed part of then-Banyana coach Vera Pauw’s side preparations for the African Women Championship. In Ghana in 2014, Banyana turned the heat on during the group stages of Africa Women Cup of Nations. They put 7 goals past Equatorial Guinea who only managed one goal in reply. Striker Thembi Kgatlana was the star of the game. She scored two of the seven goals during that game. Young footballer Linda Mothlo and Jane were also on the scoresheet during the game. During the 2018 COSAFA tournament from which they emerged champions, Banyana also started the tournament on a high note. In their final group game against Malawi, the team racked up the goals. They scored 6 goals to take the victory and end top of their group. Mothlo scored a hatrick during that game. That game also marked captain Janine van Wyk’s 150 appearances for the team.