On March 29, the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) published the names of all the candidates nominated by political parties. The names are on the IEC website. People have until April 2 to object to any of the people on the list. This marked the latest developments as South Africa moves closer to the May 8 election. On March 20, political parties contesting the 2019 National Elections gathered to sign the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) code of conduct.  This ceremony marked a public commitment by political parties to uphold the provisions and the purpose of the Code Conduct. During the ceremony there was a ballot draw to decide the position of parties on the ballot paper. This was to ensure there isn’t any confusion and there is fairness with regards to how the parties line up. Possible confusions like similar party names, colours and logos are taken into consideration in the ordering process. Before parties could take part in the ceremony, parties had a March 13 deadline to pay a deposit to secure their place on the national and provincial elections ballots. “Parties contesting both national and provincial elections are required to pay a deposit of R200,000 for the national ballot and R45,000 for each provincial ballot. The deposit is refunded in full to parties which win at least one seat in each legislature they contest. The deposits of parties which fail to secure a seat are forfeited to the National Revenue Fund,” the IEC website explains. These are the parties confirmed to be on the national ballot this year: When South Africans go into the voting booth on May 8, this is the ballot where votes will be placed. In #SAElections2019 ballot draw on 20 March to separate parties which may confuse voters, AIC retained its alphabetical position on ballot, APC moved to the end of those parties starting with letter “A” on ballot, & ANC was placed in middle of list of parties starting with “A”. pic.twitter.com/YfGlG5g5Ec The Daily Vox team has been compiling profiles on political parties competing in the elections. Here is the current list – which will be updated all the time. Get to know who’s on your ballot sheet. The Daily Vox will be profiling as many of the interesting parties competing in the National #Elections2019 as possible. pic.twitter.com/g8oUWZhEOl Additional reporting by Shaazia Ebrahim.