As the nation continues to mourn the status of women in South Africa, many have taken to the streets. Monday’s news that a 42-year-old post-office employer had raped and murdered 19-year-old University of Cape Town (UCT) student Uyinene Mrewetyana brought the country to a standstill. Already, a number of universities have reacted in mourning and protest. But ordinary people are organising too. Capetonians marched to Parliament and outside the CTICC building where World Economic Forum is taking place to voice their anger over the crimes against women on Wednesday. Here’s a list of some of the planned action all over the country that will take place over the next couple of weeks. Young women plan to gather peacefully, all dressed in black, at Parliament to mourn, bring light to and pay respects to the women who have been raped, murdered and have been held, or are currently being held hostage. They will also mourn those who have lived through such trauma. When: 5 September at 10:30 Where: Parliament of South Africa, 90 Plein Street, Cape Town Organisers are planning a stand-in and protest to dnd violence against womxn*. When: 6 September at 10am Where: Outside the ICC, Durban Wits students are organising a peaceful sit-in to protest the lack of safe spaces for women in South Africa. They are calling on other universities and institutions to do the same thing at the same time. Protesters have been asked to wear black. When: 9 September at 7:30am Where: The Piazza outside the Great Hall, Wits University Wits students are planning to march from West Campus to East Campus of the university. They then plan to demonstrate in front of the Great Hall. Protesters are asked to wear black and purple clothes. When: 10 September at 8am Where: Amic Deck, University of the Witwatersrand Civil society groups are calling for organising a women’s march against gender-based violence. When: 13 September at 3am Where: Outside the JSE, Sandton Community organisers in Midrand are calling on the community to stand up for the rights of women and children in our country. They are planning a peaceful march from Waterfall Park (Mall of Africa) to Waterfall Corner Shopping center. Protesters have been asked to wear purple. When: 14 September 2019 at 11am until 3pm Where: Waterfall Park, Midrand, 1686, South Africa *The term womxn is used to be inclusive of all femme-identifying people, not just cisgendered women.