An intergenerational global climate strike is happening. From September 20-27, thousands of people around the world will be taking to the streets to demand climate justice. This call is inspired by the walkouts organised by Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg. The school strikes were an international movement of school students not attending classes and instead of taking part in demonstrations to demand action against climate change. Now the strikes are going globally. The Daily Vox team rounds up some of the strikes happening in South Africa. These are the demands of those striking. The declaration of a provincial and national climate emergency, a ban on new coal-fired power stations and fossil fuel mining licences, a commitment to 100% renewable energy generation by 2030. Additionally there is the demand for the creation of a mandatory climate-education curriculum for South Africa; and, prioritisation of much-needed restoration of degraded landscapes and funding of ecological infrastructure. Author’s note: This story will be updated with more climate strikes. If you know of or are organising a strike that isn’t on this list please tweet us @thedailyvox or @fatimamoosa17. Students at the Ukhanyo Secondary School will be holding a climate strike. It will be taking place at 558 Takuta St, KwaNonqubela, Alexandria, 6185. Date: 19 September Time: 11:00 In Johannesburg, there will be a climate change action march. Organised by Extinction Rebellion South Africa, the march will start at Pieter Roos Park ending at the Gauteng Legislature. Date: 20 September Time: 10:00 – 14:00 Organised by the South Durban Community Environmental Alliance, there will be a march from the Durban International Convention Centre to the City Hall. Date: 20 September 1 Time: 11:00 Organised by the Fridays For Future Students, the protest will be happening at the Union Buildings. Date: 20 September Time: 11:00 This strike will start at the Greens. The event will be followed by a week of positive action. They are calling on people to organise restorative action for the climate in their communities. Date: 20 September Time: 12:00 – 14:00 This strike will be held outside the Eskom offices in Cape Town. Those striking will demand a just transition to people owned energy. Date: 20 September Time: 11:00 – 14:30 Copac and the South African Food Sovereignty Coalition will be forming a human chain outside the Sasol offices in Sandton. Date: 20 September Time: 10:00 – 12:30