While 2018 was the year for amazing movie releases (Remember Inxeba and Black Panther !)  2019 has some great releases coming out which is sure to see people flocking to the cinemas. Here are the ones we are most looking forward to. Avengers Endgame: The highly anticipated fourth Avengers movie will be releasing on April 26. Picking up from the cliffhanger of Avengers: Infinity War, the story is going to center around Thanos and the destruction the villain has wreaked on the world.  Aladdin: Releasing on May 24, Aladdin is the live movie adaption of the 1992 Disney animated film of the same name. The story is the classic rags to riches tale of Aladdin, a boy living on the streets of the fictional country of Agrabah.  Captain Marvel: Captain Marvel is going to be the latest superhero to join the Marvel Comics movies. Her appearance was teased at the end of Avengers: Infinity War but this movie – releasing on March 8 – will provide the backstory for one of the Marvel Universe’s mightiest heroes.  Fiela se kind: Based on the bestselling novel by Dalene Matthee, the movie tells the story of coloured woman who raises a white child as her own. The boy is then forced to live with a family of woodcutters who claim that he is theirs. The movie will be releasing on September 13. Kandasamys: The Wedding: South African comedies are a genre all on their own. Releasing April 19, Kandasamys: The Wedding is the highly anticipated sequel to the first movie: Kandasamys: The Wedding and will deal with two Chatsworth families as they plan the wedding of their children.  Love Lives Here: Local is lekker with the all-star South African cast who all hailing from KwaZulu-Natal. It tells the story of Zinhle Malinga whose search for Prince Charming has left her disillusioned about the idea of true love. Releasing March 29, the movie will show Zinhle’s journey to find true love and the meaning of love. Matwetwe: Releasing January 25, this South African coming of age adventure is directed by Kagiso Lediga. The story follows Lefa and Papi – best friends and recent high school graduates – over the course of one action packed New Year’s Eve in Atteridgeville.  The Lion King: One of the most highly anticipated Disney live action adaptations of the year, the much-loved childhood classic will be releasing July 19. With the voices of Beyonce, Donald Glover and John Kani, there is no doubt the movie will be fantastic.  The Sun is also a Star: Adapted from the young adult novel of the same name written by Nicola Yoon, the movie will be releasing June 7. Tackling issues of immigration and deportation, the movie tells the story of Natasha – who is being deported – and Daniel, the son of Korean immigrants.  What Men Want: A remake of the 2000 film – What Women Men – the movie stars Taraji P. Henson as the main character who is passed up for well-deserved promotion and she questions what she needs to do to succeed in a man’s world. The movie will be releasing February 8.  What are you most excited to watch in 2019? Tweet us @thedailyvox or let us know below.