We thought we left load shedding in 2014/2015 but surprise…  On Monday the country was hit by Stage 4 load shedding, leading even President Cyril Ramaphosa to say he was ‘shocked, worried, and disturbed’.  Here’s what you need to know about load shedding (which doesn’t seem like it’s going anywhere anytime soon). Load shedding is a fancy euphemism that Eskom created which basically means power cuts. But according to Eskom, Description load shedding is “a controlled option to respond to unplanned events to protect the electricity power system from a total blackout.” Eskom says it’s a way to protect us from a total country-wide blackout which is, of course, more serious. A blackout happens when there’s too much demand and too little supply, which creates a power imbalance and trips the system. Is it a #PowerOutage or #Loadshedding? If the power goes out, do not assume that it is loadshedding. It could be a local power outage due to a technical fault. Check out the difference: pic.twitter.com/3qCjgoNTmo — South African Government (@GovernmentZA) February 13, 2019  Basically Eskom is a mess. The power utility has had serious maintenance issues at plants because of its outdated infrastructure. This is why you probably experienced some load shedding in November and December. Plant breakdowns are also higher than usual which makes performance unpredictable. On February 13, the department of public enterprises released a document that said Eskom is “technically insolvent”, and will “cease to exist at [the] current trajectory by April 2019”. Eskom also has a whopping R419 billion debt burden. The document also says that the power utility owes the municipality billions. In Soweto, currently sits at R28 billion and is growing at a rate of R1 billion per month. Sipho’s Political Newsletter: Missing From SONA, SA’s Green New Deal  When loadshedding hits https://t.co/oi28KT7tTE — Yaaseen Barnes (@Ya_a_seen_Him) February 12, 2019  Judging by the above, we can hope and we can pray but, probably not. During his State of the Nation address on February 7, Ramaphosa announced that Eskom would be split into three separate entities – generation, transmission and distribution – which would still fall under the company Eskom Holdings. We still have not received a timeline for the splitting up of Eskom, or an explanation as to whether government would consider privatising some parts of it (which trade unions would strongly oppose). Ramaphosa said the utility will undergo a nine-point turnaround plan and that government would step up and foot the bill. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni will provide more details in the Budget on February 20. Doesn’t Eskom know they have to break the coal in half and move it abit — Liam Cue® (@DjLiam_Cue) February 12, 2019  Stages indicate the frequency of load shedding. This means they indicate how many MWs of power is shed, and how long you will have to go without electricity. Luckily, load shedding rotates which means different areas of different cities are being hit at different times. Stage 1 will affect you three times over a four-day period for a total of two hours at a time. It can also happen three times over an eight-day period for four hours at a time. Stage 1 allows Eskom to to shed 1000 MW of the national load. Stage 2 allows up to 2000 MW of the national power load to be shed. Stage 2 is frequency of stage 1. Load shedding happens six times over a four-day period for two hours at a time, or six times over an eight-day period for four hours at a time At stage 3, Eskom ups the frequency of stage 2 by 50%. There will be load shedding nine times over a four-day period for two hours each time, or nine times over an eight-day period for four hours each time. Naturally, stage 3 sheds up to 3000 MW of the national load. With 4000 MW of the national load being shed, stage 4 is double the frequency of stage 2. This means you will be experience load shedding 12 times over a four-day period for two hours at a time, or 12 times over an eight-day period for four hours at a time. Don’t panic or anything but Eskom recently announced that it would be expanding its load shedding plan from four stages to eight stages. This will allow from 5000 MW and up to 8 000 MW to be shed from the national grid. Eskom has said it is highly unlikely that stages 5-8 will ever be instituted. But you never know. Apparently at stage 5 they come to your house and blow off your candles…#Loadshedding — Wothi Mvelase (@awenkosii) February 11, 2019  If, for some reason, more load needs to be shed then we will experience extra, unscheduled load shedding. Basically, you can experience a blackout at any time without warning. The actual stage in use at the time will be displayed on the main Eskom website and on the home page of the Load Shedding Website. The information will be on the websites even if Eskom does not supply electricity to your municipality. You can also download the the MyEskom app or the Eskom SePush app onto your smartphone. Be strong South Africa, and keep the candles and matches at the ready.