UPDATE: Hospital manager at City Hospital Rafeek Nakooda said the DUT student was rushed to hospital with his friends. As far as they know, the student was taken into trauma care as quickly as possible. “I know there were friends that came through, there may have been a bit of a commotion in the front. But from what I understand, when the patient came through, they were taken to the trauma department because it was an emergency,” Nakooda said. On Monday a 20-year-old student who was shot at the Durban University of Technology following a scuffle between students and private security personnel, died at the City Hospital. There was no next of kin to claim him or process his paperwork. On Tuesday a third year management student was shot at the Durban University of University after a scuffle ensued between students and private security personnel. According to eyewitness, the scene erupted when students were chanting outside Steve Biko campus awaiting the address from the student representative council about the outcomes of the meeting with the management. After the student was shot, he was immediately rushed off to City Hospital, where he later died after allegedly being unable to attain any medical assistance. Witnesses say that no next of kin were available at the time of death to claim the hospital bill. Passersby had to assist to get the victim to the hospital, where he died. “He was bleeding and we had to find a way to get him to the hospital, so we stopped a van that was passing by and it assisted us get to the hospital. However, he was unable to receive any medical assistance,” a student who saw what happened said to the Daily Vox. A former EFFSC chairperson said chaos erupted when the security personnel instructed the crowd to disperse but when their order fell onto deaf ears, an altercation ensued. “We were outside the campus waiting for the leaders to come back and address us. The security came to us and ordered us to disperse but we didn’t and an exchange of words started, which was followed by flying stones. We weren’t protesting but we were awaiting the leadership with the feedback so we were provoked. “They just told us once to disperse but because we didn’t see anything wrong, that’s where we started the exchange of words with them up until stones were thrown. They ran away and hid, by the time we went out on the road they reappeared and started throwing stones and we responded. Then this one security guy took out his gun and started firing,” he said. Some students were allegedly beaten by the security personnel even though they weren’t protesting. “I was among those who were beaten and kicked but I was able to find a way to escape and ran to a commune that was closer because I was tired from all the fighting. I had lost all the energy. It confused us how these guys carry live rounds on campus because from my knowledge, only police carry live ammunition whenever there are protests. At first, we thought he was using rubber bullets until we saw the student laying down looking lifeless and bleeding,” he said. Students described the deceased as a kind and humble person who was a final year student. The university has confirmed the passing of a student in a statement: “The Durban University of Technology has received sad news that one of the students who was involved in protest action earlier this afternoon, outside DUT’s Steve Biko Campus, has sadly passed away. The student passed on while receiving medical attention at the City Hospital in Durban. Students have been protesting across KwaZulu Natal this week at DUT, the University of KwaZulu Natal, and Mangosuthu University of Technology. DUT was shut indefinitely on Tuesday. The chairperson of the SRC Khanyisani Khambule said the organisation was saddened by the news. “We are really heartbroken about the passing of the student, especially because his life was taken by a security guard, the people we continue to fight for so that they are treated fairly. We just hope that justice will prevail,” he said. Khambule said the family of the deceased student had already been alerted of the tragedy. In a statement, DUT said it was saddened by this “unfortunate event”. As a result of the tragedy and the other violent altercations, the university will be shut down until further notice. 