“What do we lose when we choose ourselves, especially as women?” asks Jamaican author Nicole Dennis-Benn. The Daily Vox spoke with Dennis-Benn during her visit to South Africa early in September. The author had been in the country for the Open Book Festival in Cape Town and for a book launch in Johannesburg. Her latest novel Patsy, about a woman who leaves her daughter behind in Jamaica to pursue love and opportunity in America,  has received international acclaim. The book explores themes of motherhood and intersectional identities. That week, South African news was devastating. News that a post office employee had raped and murdered 19-year-old university student Uyinene Mrwetyana had caused an eruption of protests against gender-based violence and femicide. At the same time, there had been a series of extremely violent xenophobic attacks on Africans living in South Africa. It’s during this time that we sat down for coffee with Dennis-Benn, who was contemplating the socio-political climate in South Africa. Here are five things from our chat with Dennis-Benn. I was just jotting down a few notes from memory about everything that’s happening currently. I feel like the timing of my visit was definitely right, although it’s such a dark period. Being here, hearing on the news about the xenophobia and gender-based violence, it’s not merely fiction anymore. Can you imagine being a working woman and an immigrant? That’s Patsy. That’s why I started writing this. Although my fiction writing draws on reality, now I’m actually facing it in real life. I really commend South Africa for marching to the streets telling big business to help and government to change their policies. In Jamaica, where the same thing is happening, no one is doing that for girls, or women. I feel like in South Africa, something is happening. And I like the direction that, hopefully,change is about to happen. I had to deal with that and that I was on panels during the time when women were marching. If I wasn’t on the panel, I’d probably be marching as well. But then I was realising that my march is in my words. That’s how I protest. Even Toni Morrison had said, ‘As writers, it’s important to use our work as our advocacy’. I wanted to question motherhood and what it means to be a woman. Patsy was actually leaving her child back in Jamaica. It took me a while to wrap my mind around that because, being socialised as a woman in society, I’m like, ‘Oh my goodness, what’s my character about to do?’ But then I had to embrace her and empathise with her and love her. She kind of helped me learn more for humanity in general, and also what it’s like to be a woman in society. Many of us are not given choices to begin with. For a character like Patsy, she was not given any of those opportunities. Motherhood happened to her, she didn’t choose it. I had to to put myself in her shoes: a young woman who has so much more to offer. But she couldn’t offer herself to her child given that her own self-worth was compromised because of how she was raised. Patsy’s mother was in the church, more into Jesus figurines than filling the cupboard with food and combing her hair. Patsy grew up seeing all of those things and internalising that that if she’s not worthy of her mother’s attention, then what is she worthy of? Now she’s looking at her child saying, ‘I cannot give you anything’, kind of like an act of self-preservation. She gave her daughter to somebody else who could raise her better than she, herself, could. But at the same time, she was making that choice, choosing herself first. That then begs the question: What do we lose when we choose ourselves, especially as women in society? Writing characters with multiple identities – to use a fancy word, intersectionality – is so important. I have all these intersectional identities, so it’s natural that these will pour into the characters. I know what it’s like to be a working-class, Jamaican immigrant, queer woman. I just moulded parts of myself into Patsy. I wanted to put Jamaican women on the page because we are often marginalised. As a writer, I played with these margins. If you notice, Patsy is not only marginalised as a Jamaican woman in America or because of her gender identity, given that she’s not a mother she’s sitting on the outskirts of what society’s definition of womanhood is. You can’t pinpoint Patsy’s sexuality. I’m playing with borders. Of course, as an undocumented immigrants in America, that’s another border that she’s perched on. And then Tru as well. So at the end of the day, these characters are kind of defining themselves in a world that’s quick to define them. I’m kind of working my way through what that means to be existing on borders or margins. I wanted to really give the complexities of the characters life. That’s why I titled the novel Patsy because it’s such a common Jamaican woman’s name so it’s kind of like a chorus of voices in one. So, she could be anyone and everyone. Who has the power to define us? Usually in the Caribbean growing up, for example, I’d see feminists growing up. But those women would never see themselves as feminists, for example. You know, they’ll do things that men are doing or are expected to do, but they’ll never call themselves that. They can have an attraction to a woman but never defined it as, ‘Oh, I’m a lesbian’. When I’m writing these individuals on the page, it’s impossible for me to have them mentally acknowledge what they are, defined by the gaze of Western readers or people who are inclined to put them in that box. Growing up, I was a big fan of Sweet Valley High and the Babysitters Club. I would devour those books, as soon as one was done, I’d be at the library. My mother saw I loved them so she would go to the bookstore and bring me new books and that was the best gift ever. Those are the stories I was reading. By the time I started writing my own stories, I was writing girls with blonde hair and blue eyes because that was all I knew in terms of how to tell stories. They all had picket fences and there was snow on the ground. Jamaica doesn’t even have snow but I thought, ‘Why not?’ I realised quite early that what we read can we can actually influence how we see ourselves. I saw Tony Morrisen’s Beloved on a table in our library at school. They didn’t teach her books at all but her book was in the library so I took it… And I still have it to this day. I read it and I was like, ‘Whoa, you can look like that and still be a writer.’ Even though I didn’t really understand at the time what Beloved meant, until I was rereading it in grad school, I’m so happy that I found it. As a writer, I’m always inspired by something. One of my best writing processes is not sitting by the computer, its being out and about and sitting in coffee shops like this one or on the subway in New York City. Some people are an inspiration. By the time I get to my computer, I can pinpoint somebody who moved me so much that I want to write a story. That’s how Patsy became a book. Imagining that one nanny sitting alone on the subway, to her jumping off the east side of Manhattan. It is a very common thing and nobody really questions who those women are. So I wanted to work on that and give Patsy a complex story, where other people who are not like Patsy or may see her walking with babies in the carriages but never questioning who she is, where she came from, why she came and what she left behind. That’s really what I gave them. More women are realising that we can write our own stories and owning our narratives. I used to resent the fact that a lot of the writers writing about Jamaica, and still to this day they do that, are British, white men observing us from afar and writing our stories. I know it happens globally, that people are writing other people’s stories. I think it’s unfair, especially when we’re not that culture or not of that person’s race. You don’t know the nuances. I felt that as a Jamaican, working-class woman, I can own my own narrative. I can write about the exploitation of our bodies, not only by my own country, but the tourism industry. The sexualisation of our young girls that’s happening and people are turning away from, nobody is talking about it that they’re doing here that right now currently. And so those are the things I want to put into my work so that they have a voice and the platform.  Interview edited for length, brevity and clarity.